[0:00:00] null: 

[0:00:00] spk_0: Okay, We're here with the president. We're very excited to be here.

[0:00:04] spk_1: I'm very excited to be

[0:00:05] spk_0: very grateful. Thank you very much. You must be a little wistful. You must feel a little like David Ortiz about a month ago, where you know, you're you're going on to great things in the next chapter of your life. Stop hitting and you're still heading. But my feet hurt. But but, you know, you'll never quite have a job as exhilarating.

[0:00:25] spk_1: Well, you know it. It is time I tell people that this has been a great run. I have loved this job. I'm not gonna pretend that there have been moments of great frustration, but it is a singular privilege. Uh, I'm as good a president now as I've ever been. Because you learn stuff.

[0:00:50] spk_0: Yeah,

[0:00:50] spk_1: right. You're sure you've sort of been around the track a bunch of times, But I also see now the wisdom of the founders that at a certain point, you have to let go for the democracy to work, that there has to be fresh legs. There have to be new people. And you have to have the humility to recognize that you know you're a citizen and, uh, you go back to being a citizen after after this office's is over. So we're just trying to run through the tape. And, uh, the great thing is, I've got an unbelievable team around me of people who have done extraordinary work. I'm sort of the frontman for it.

[0:01:39] spk_0: That's very modest.

[0:01:40] spk_1: Well, you know, the fact that you that the team won't be there in the same way I think is the only thing that where you have a little bit of

[0:01:50] spk_0: we're a week out from the election, and I You're a history buff. I think when we look back, if Mr Trump is defeated, I'm hopeful that we will be. The takeaway will be that socialism was not such a dirty word anymore because of our friend Bernie Sanders, and just wondering someone who was accused of being a socialist before What you think about the idea that in America yes, we're capitalists. But something's just should not be for the profit motive, healthcare, prisons, the military elections and I would add news gathering. People say, Get the money out of politics. I think you've got to get out of the news business first, but we're never gonna learn anything.

[0:02:32] spk_1: Well, a couple things I say first evolved. If you look at the United States, Canada, Europe, all the advanced democracies, then clearly you've got to have a market based system because it's really productive and it spurs on innovation, freedom and entrepreneurship. And you're gonna have a social welfare state. And in some ways, the label. Socialism doesn't make that much sense in a context where there's no economy that doesn't have some socialist elements, meaning that there's some common goods that we all agree everybody should have. That's what Social Security is. That's what Medicare is. To some extent. That's what public schools are. We all chip in to make sure that everybody, no matter the circumstances of your birth, have these baseline goods and a CZ. You know, I felt pretty strongly that health care should be one of those one of those goods. I've also said in the past that if I were designing a system from scratch, I would have probably looked at a single payer system. But we do have legacy systems, and that's the only thing that sometimes when I've had conversations with Bernie, I've said to him that we don't start from scratch there. You've got a one trillion dollar healthcare industry, for example, and you got a lot of people who are working for and a lot of special interests involved. And so my goal in the Affordable Care Act was if I could get millions of more people insurance, then that's my first goal, because for them, this is not an abstraction. It's like, I'm not gonna lose my home or my kid's gonna get coverage and that's what we've done. But I see it as a starter home, and then the question is, how do we make sure everybody ultimately gets it? Because they're still gaps in coverage? I think the same is true. You know, when it comes to some other issues to me, I think there is a pretty bright line around prisons. I agree with you that the criminal justice system should not be infected by, uh, the profit motive. This is the awesome power of the state saying we can take somebody's freedom away. We can lock him up because they've breached some part of the social contract. The notion that you want in you might incentivize people to a lot more people in. We're keeping there longer, uh or not provide the kind of rehabilitation service is so that they can get out of there. I think that's a problem. And so I'm very proud of some of the work that we've been trying to do along these lines. We got more work to do when it comes to the media at, you know, that's a tougher call because look, state run media, that's what they got in

[0:05:32] spk_0: not state run, but just like it used to be, where it was a loss leader for that. For the networks, they didn't have to make a profit because

[0:05:41] spk_1: because they had a monopoly to some degree right, so they were fat and happy. In this kind of environment, it's hard to figure out how you would do that. Um, but you know that I think the question I'd have when it comes to the media is how do we create a space where truth gets eyeballs at his meeting and we could build a common conversation? What is true when I leave here? One of the things I'm most concerned about is the balkanization of the media where you've got 800 stations, you've got all these websites. People have difficulty now just sorting out what's true and what's not. Yeah, and if you don't have some common baseline effects, yeah, we can have a disagreement about how to deal with climate change. But if we have a big chunk of the country that share just discounts, what 99% assigned to say completely, it's very hard to figure out how we move the democracy forward. So I don't have a good formula for that. But I think that it's something that I'll spend a lot of time thinking about and seeing. If maybe we can build some platforms where everybody says, Okay, let's let's, uh, what's let's agree on facts and then argue about means after that.

[0:07:08] spk_0: Okay, let me ask you about a question that I know people who watch our show we're interested in, Which is marijuana reform.

[0:07:14] spk_1: Is that something that you care

[0:07:16] spk_0: about? Something I care about its way. Both made jokes about it, but it's not funny to the people who get arrested, which is over half 1,000,000 I think last year, um, you know, you and I both could have had our lives ruined. Not really. By smoking it, but by being arrested for it. Um, and, you know, I feel like you had a checklist about Let's get rid of a lot of the stupid stuff, like opening up Cuba. You know, you came out for gay marriage. I was hoping ending the drug war would be on that list. It's on the ballot now in nine states in a week, including California for recreational and Arizona and medical in places like North Dakota. Isn't it time the federal government caught up up to progressive states like Arizona and North Dakota?

[0:08:06] spk_1: Well, here's what I'm I have always believed that to the extent that the society legitimately wants toe guard against any kind of substance abuse that you treated as a public health problem Look, I'm the next smoking cigarette smoke X X and

[0:08:29] spk_0: really? Yep, I really a winker. Did you get that manure either? I thought I caught a wink to, uh Ah,

[0:08:40] spk_1: I'm sure I'm the heck out of Nicorette. Really? Yeah, but you know what? I what? I passed health care reform. That I think right, I'd had my last cigarette. Um, but But the reason is because there was this enormous public health effort toe get kids not to pick up smoking on, make sure the parents felt guilty if they were passing on that that have it to their kids. And and so that's where I think we need to go with pot alcohol. And so So I don't think that legalization is a panacea, but I think that we're gonna have to have a more serious conversation about how we are treating marijuana and our drug laws Generally. Uh, the good news is, is that after this referendum, to some degree, it's gonna call the question because if in fact, it passed in all these states, you know, about 1/5 of the country that's operating under one set of laws and forfeits in another the Justice Department d a. Fbi for them to try to straddle and figure out how they're supposed to enforce laws in some places and not in others, they're gonna guard against transport transporting these drugs across state lines. But you got the entire Pacific corridor where this is this is legal. That is not gonna be tenable. Now. It's not something that I think is gonna happen overnight, and I think there's some legitimate concerns that people have about how you draw lines on these issues. But it is indisputable that right now the biggest drug crisis we have is with opioids many of quitter legal and are ravaging entire communities all across the country. And for us, too, re sort. How we think about these problems and not think of everything through the criminal justice lens. But also through the public health plans, I think is something that's gonna need to have.

[0:10:57] spk_0: Okay, um, switching topics. I don't have anybody from my tribe of atheists ever. Thank you for giving us a shout out your first inaugural, but you didn't mention nonbelievers. I think it was part than once more than what

[0:11:13] spk_1: I mean. It's not just in that speech. I've done it often.

[0:11:15] spk_0: Well, we appreciate it because we do feel like untouchables to a degree. I mean, I don't know if you saw the latest religion survey, but almost 1/4 of the country are nuns. I don't mean the ones who hit me on the knuckles with a ruler in Sunday school. I mean, they put none for religion of right, Right. They're not No, they're atheists, agnostics or they just don't want to get up on Sunday morning. And we have no representation in Congress if if our numbers were represented to be over Ah, hung 100 Congress people who felt that way. Um, it just seems like we are not included in the basket of diversity in America. Which is odd because we are the biggest minority. That is a bigger minority than any other minority you can name. Don't you think we should get a little more love?

[0:12:04] spk_1: You know, I guess my question would be whether there is active persecution of atheists. I think that there are certain Well, I think for a candidate, I think you're right. That there are certain, uh,

[0:12:21] spk_0: we might be

[0:12:22] spk_1: occupations, probably most prominently politics where there would be a bias against somebody who's agnostic or atheist in running for office. I think that's still true. Outside of that arena, though, you seem to have done all right with your TV show. I I don't I don't get it, since the extent that they're boycotting cute because of your other wacky ideas rather than

[0:12:47] spk_0: your particular view, our relation. Whatever after wacky idea. The you know, I agree with you.

[0:12:54] spk_1: I think I think the average American, uh, if they go to the workplace, somebody's next to him. They're not poking around trying to figure out what their religious beliefs are. So so So here's what I would say that, uh, no. I think that we should foster a culture in which people's private religious beliefs, including atheists and agnostics, are respected. And that's the kind of culture that I think allows all of us then to believe what we want. That's freedom of conscience. That's what our Constitution guarantees. Uh, and where we get into problems typically is when our personal religious faith or the community of faith that we participate in tips into a sort of fundamentalist extremism in which it's not enough for us to believe what we believe. But we start feeling obligated toe hit you over the head because you don't believe the same thing or to treat us as somebody who's who's less than that I am.

[0:14:13] spk_0: But we might be more pro science in America if we were less religious, don't you think?

[0:14:18] spk_1: Well, you know what I think? The issues we have with science these days are not restricted toe. What's happening with respect to religion? I There are a lot of very religious scientists around. I think the problem is that in our school systems and to some degree, and this is where it is relevant with school boards around the country, that air mandating curriculums and textbooks you start seeing this weird watering down of scientific fact so that our kids are growing up in an environment. And this connects with what I was saying earlier about the media where everything's contested, that nothing is true, because if it's on Facebook, it all looks the same. And if you're reading something from a Nobel Prize winning physicist next, you know some guy in his underwear writing in his basement or his mom's basement, uh, on texted, it looks like it's equally plausible and part of what we have to do a better job of if our democracies of function in a complicated, diverse society like this is to teach our kids enough critical thinking to be able to sort out, uh, what is true and what his pulse, what is, uh, contestable on DDE? What is incontestable and way seemed to have have trouble with that on our political system doesn't help.

[0:16:01] spk_0: Okay, I want to ask you this question and again, it's an issue I think you don't get asked a lot about. But it's important to my audience. I know people will roll their eyes and say so California to ask this but food purity something that means a lot to me. Somehow it got to be elitist or liberal. I don't get that to want food that isn't full of pesticides or food that wasn't created by torturing animals and factory farms isn't full of antibiotics, which is a problem in itself. I feel like we're upside down on food. We eat too much corn because we grow too much corn because we subsidize do much corn. And you know, one of the problems with the Affordable Care Act is that people were found sicker then expected on that's partly birds of the food. I think

[0:16:49] spk_1: an obesity and all the work that Michelle's been doing,

[0:16:51] spk_0: Yeah, yeah, shouldn't Dio would be put morte the top of the agenda. When we come to addressing health

[0:16:57] spk_1: care, there's no doubt about it that right now we got a disease care system. We should have a health care system and health care system would include nutrition exercise,

[0:17:06] spk_0: but also pushing back on

[0:17:08] spk_1: corporal. And so I think what is true is that for a long time, agribusiness has at a obviously a prominent seated the table in Congress. It's bipartisan. Uh, some of the reforms that we've tried to initiate, for example, in the school lunch program have actually made some progress on this front. Michelle deserves a lot of credit for it, as do a bunch of organizations that have worked on this. Um yeah, that. I think the strategy has to be one of persuasion, and it has to be more demand driven in the sense that one of things Michelle's finding is is that when she worked with, uh, walmart or craft or what have you? And she said, Look, here's the day. No, this is what parents want now. The profit motive can actually work in favor of food purity, a cz long as there's good information out. And so part of our strategy has been, how do we make sure that consumers are where they've got the information they need? Now I will tell you and this may be controversial. Some your audience. It is important toe. Look at the science on this stuff. So when it comes to antibiotics, for example, the science is clear. We pump are animals full of it. And that's not just a problem in terms of what we're ingesting. It's also problem that more more. Uh, yeah, bacteria's becoming resistant. Resistant to antibiotics. Um, but in some cases, like, for example, the GMO debate, there are areas where there are legitimate concerns. There's some areas where the science seems to indicate. Well, this is okay. We

[0:19:03] spk_0: got back to the science says it doesn't increase the yield. While exactly they use Justus many, if not more, pesticide. Well,

[0:19:09] spk_1: that's so. So my point is that what we have to be make sure we're doing whether we're on the left or the right is being driven by the science. And if it turns out that some of these genetically modified foods aren't healthier, aren't more productive and use more pesticides, then we should follow the science. If in some cases they're not causing any harm, then we should follow the signs there as well. And that's what what I've tried to do in this administration is and then this goes beyond just nutrition policy. What I always say to my teams are figure out what is right. As faras as best we can tell, figure out what the best policy is big here. What the science tells us. Figure out what the facts tell us what, what, what are best ideas out there and sort through. And then once you figure that out, then we'll worry about the politics. After that, don't start with the politics and then try to get the facts to fit into the politics. And I think that if yeah, at minimum, what that does is it keeps us tethered to reality. It makes us go to bed at night feeling pretty good about what we've been trying to do because we're not constantly tryingto tack toe whatever is fashionable. What public opinions were out there. We just try to figure out as best we can. What is the right answer and you follow that? Do

[0:20:44] spk_0: you think we asked too little of the public politicians? You know, of course, are always kissing up to the public and saying things like, If we only had a government as good as the people. But the people aren't very well informed. They don't exercise their right to vote. And when they do, they don't know much about it. I just feel like we don't we don't ask the people very much were afraid to ask. The people eat better. You know that the phrase was yes, we can. I feel like they're not pulling their weight on the Wii. It's a partnership with them. Eat better Vote Maur learned something.

[0:21:17] spk_1: I I actually think that part of the pitch I've made throughout my campaign and throughout my presidency is exactly that. Uh, change doesn't come from on high that if you're waiting for Congress, then you're going to be waiting a long time. Even a pretty capable, well meaning president is going toe Onley be able to take the country so far, without people, ordinary folks all across the country being engaged, being involved, being active. I constantly quote Louis Brandeis, who said the most important office in a democracy is the office of Citizen. It's not president, it's not Senator, it's not mayor. And so I have tried consistently to say to the American people that uh, this is only gonna work if you're engaged. Now, I will tell you, having traveled every state met with people from every walk of life, uh, people are basically good. You know, I I am a, uh I'm a glass half full guy and on optimist about the human spirit. You're right, though, that people are busy, they're stressed and they don't have time to follow the intricacies of some debate around Medicaid or yeah, what's going on in Syria? And so part of what? When I say I want a government as good as the the American people, What I mean by that is that I think people's instincts their gut. Oh, what were they? What they want out of life. How they want to see people treated is actually pretty good. But the question then becomes How do we get enough information in front of them toe be ableto make good decisions? I've always believed that if I could get into no, If I could sit in the living room with every person in America over that I've got the majority on my side on a healthy majority on my side on every issue that we work on just by having a conversation. The problem is we got all these filters. And look, if I watched Fox News, I wouldn't vote for me either, right? Right, Because you know, you've got this screen, this fun house mirror through which people are receiving information, how how to break through. That is a big challenge. This whole conversation that's been had lately, Uh, in the aftermath of the rise of Trump, this notion that oh, part of what's happened is is that both Republican and Democratic elites of collected the white working class. The truth of the matter is, is that every policy I've put forward would make a huge difference with working class and the black working class and the Latino working class, whether it's raising the minimum wage or the Affordable Care Act, given people health care who don't have it, and you were working hard and need help, or making sure that unions are are strong so that you could have a little more leverage at the workplace, or making sure that you know something like the Consumer Finance Protection Bureau is protecting against some scam mortgage. But what is true is that that because it's hard to get into the details of all these issues with folks were running around, dropping off the kids at school and trying to punch the clock, figuring out how to make ends meet and just want to relax when they come home and not watch, you know, meet the press then in that environment. Ah, lot of what people take in is just symbols and signifiers on dhe you gettinto identity, politics and culture wars and and what I'd like to figure out. And I think Democrats do have an affirmative obligation to do that. Do this is tow work harder toe, too, to figure out in this new age what's the equivalent of getting into people's living rooms and being able to have a conversation and being able to listen to people? And and I've been able to do this successfully during my campaigns I have not always been able to do It is successfully here in this White House, partly because this bubble that's created around,

[0:25:55] spk_0: um, there's American need to be an empire. We have more troops in more places than any empire in the history of the world. Um, way spend over 600,000,000,000 on defense. And that's not including the nukes. Taking care of veterans Homeland security. When you add it all up, it's probably over a trillion to keep the monsters away. Um, I'm wondering if we could be just too safe spending half assed much, Eisenhower warned when he was close to the end of his second term. Like you are now about the military industrial complex and it seems no president of either party ever makes any progress on that. Pushing back on that, will it ever happen? Did you want to do that?

[0:26:37] spk_1: Well, look, I keep in mind, Billy. When I came into office, we had 100 80,000 troops just in Iraq and Afghanistan. Now we how we have about 15 1000 so that's pretty big. Uh,

[0:26:57] spk_0: but we still spend a bunch of folks still spend more,

[0:27:00] spk_1: you know, actually are spending, I think, has been steady. Um, here's here's what I'd say that humility and foreign policy is is a useful trade, particularly in the Oval Office. I think bad things happen around the world in our natural instinct is we should do something. There are times where our intervention makes a difference, but There are a lot of times where unintended consequences can result in more problems when we intervene and sorting out where those, huh? Where those issues play out is, I think one of the biggest challenges that any president asked my bias is that if it comes to defending the American people against Al Qaeda isil somebody who wants to blow up a train station entitled My Hand, that I'm gonna go after them and I make no apologies about it. And I want a vigorous military of place and when it comes to maintaining a basic international order so that a guy like Kim Jong Un in North Korea, uh, doesn't suddenly start holding all of Asia hostage because he is building bunch of nuclear weapons and feels free to threaten everybody else. It's important for us to have alliances in place and to be able to work on the international scene, and us having the most powerful military on earth helps that happen. It helps check the impulses of some other. The bad folks on guy will tell you, as somebody who has now served as commander in chief for the last eight years, not only are the men and women in uniform that I work with. Extraordinary. You know, you meet 23 year olds who are in charge life and death with missions and maintaining $1,000,000,000 pieces of equipment and they just execute and do it unbelievably well. But what you also discover is my top brass joint Chiefs of Staff. They're not. The chicken hawks were going around tryingto get us in every single war. You know, the generals, the colonel's, the commanders that I work with, They know that the wages of war and they're actually pretty thoughtful about it. And typically in the situation room, the ones who are like, well, before we go half cocked on something. Let's really think about this because this is what it would be involved. And they have seen what what's involved because most of them are people who were fighting in Iraq and fighting in Afghanistan. And they know how hard these environments are and that no matter how good our intentions, a lot of times it could go all right. Hey, where But having said all that, I think we should have restraint. I think we should have humility. I think we have to wear of a possible work multi laterally and not just unilaterally. Because if we can't organize coalitions to do things that it means that maybe way haven't thought everything through having settled that it turns out that as this flawed is, sometimes our foreign policy could be or whatever blind spots we have, we really are the indispensable nation. If we if there is a you know, a typhoon that wipes out someplace in Southeast Asia aren't military is the only organization that has the infrastructure to help those folks quickly. When Ebola came out, we actually had build the platform whereby everybody else could even think about bringing their doctors and nurses in. Um, if you have a rogue nation that decided it was going to, uh, you take action that significantly threatened, uh, a lot of people I'd want to know that the U. S military was there. And so And I can tell you, setting aside our military power, there's not an international meeting I go to in which, if we weren't sitting at the table, uh, nothing gets done. Um, because for the most part, other countries don't have either the capacity or the inclination and when you've got a bunch of authoritarian governments out there and creeping authoritarianism pulse around the world. We also are the ones who are pushing back most effectively, imperfectly but most effectively against locking up journalists and killing human rights activists and making sure that poor people get food and dealing with public health crises. Um, I think if you see the world from my seat, I won't sort of a sort of that. The one thing I think is important for progressives to guard against is, uh, a tendency sometimes two, not fully appreciate. Yeah, that that America goes

[0:33:15] spk_0: bad guys,

[0:33:16] spk_1: that America is a pretty is not just a great nation. In the sense of that, it's powerful, but that our values night on our ideals actually matter, and we do a lot of good around the world and there's some things that we do that are either ineffective or in perfect. But there's a lot to be proud of and there's a lot to build on, you know, What we gotta do is make sure that we get our own house in order so

[0:33:51] spk_0: that we can be out doing they know you're off to Ohio, right you've got an election to rig. Uh, and, uh, I want you. I want you to get out there because, boy, it's It's a very nervous time for people who are worried about Mr Trump.

[0:34:06] spk_1: The stakes are high. I know. We Yeah, we're getting

[0:34:11] spk_0: the we're getting there. We're getting a gong. But

[0:34:15] spk_1: but But But I will say this. The choice in this election should be really clear. And anybody who's who's watching your show on DDE was a supporter of mine was a supporter of Bernie's. You know, it is a progressive generally, um, this idea that somehow well, both of them have problems, and nothing will change either. Listen, all the progress we've made on climate change Paris agreement, HFC, uh, agreement, aviation agreement, the 20,000,000 people who have health insurance that right now that didn't have it before. All the progress that we've made on tryingto check, uh, the excesses Wall Street and Dodd, Frank and seat, Consumer Finance Protection Bureau. Any chance of immigration reform, including the work that we did to make sure that these amazing dreamer kids all across the country we're now going to college or serving in our military or not suddenly deported or at risk of deportation. Every single issue that we've made progress on over the last eight years is I'm gonna be on the ballot in the form of this choice. And I have worked with Hillary Clinton. I know her. And she is somebody who cares about these issues. She does her homework. She cares deeply about ordinary folks. Her policies are aligned with yours and mine. And yes, she is somebody who believes in compromising that you don't get 100% of what you want. But you know what? That's the way this democracy works. Anybody sitting on the sidelines right now or deciding to engage in a protest vote? That's a vote for Trump. And, uh, that would be badly damaging for this country. And it would be damn damaging for the world, so yeah. No, no complacency. This

[0:36:37] spk_0: So get out there. Get out there. Thank you so much. Did a hell of a job in this office. I know. I speak for myself on my own. It means a lot that you did this. You

[0:36:47] spk_1: know, I wasn't on the show that often. I watched it all the time.

[0:36:50] spk_0: Really did. Well, that's nice to hear. Thank you, Mr Breath. Appreciate it. All right,

